Lab 2 BART Expansion Study

Background

When the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) system opened in 1972, it consisted of lines serving the Bay Area and end-
ing at Daly City, Richmond, Fremont, and Concord stations. The late 1990’s and early 2000’s brought several expan-
sions of the system, including extending the Concord line to Bay Point, a new branch line to Dublin/Pleasanton, and

the extension of the Daly City line to the SF Airport and Millbrae.

Imagine you are working for BART to study the cost and benefit of several different future potential expansions.

Specifically, you will be finding out which areas would be served by the proposed extension options, and how many

people live in these areas. For the sake of simplicity in analysis, we will be making several (perhaps unrealistic) gener-
alizations about BART usage. For example, we are going to assume that each BART station serves only the residents

within four miles of it.

Using this assumption, we start with some baseline information. Following are tables showing the number of people

living within four miles of each existing BART station, summarized by county. You will be referring to these tables

later in the lab.

Skills, concepts and terms in this assignment

□ Basic overlay analysis operations: buffer, union, intersect, dissolve

□ Select By Location

□ Exporting and saving datasets from selections

□ Create summary tables

□ Two GIS file types: shapefile, geodatabase

□ The three software components: ArcCatalog, ArcMap, ArcToolbox

Deliverables

For this assignment you will be turning in a simple report as an Excel spreadsheet

showing the list of cities newly served by the proposed BART stations, the numbers of

people served by the existing station and the numbers of people newly served, a map

graphic as illustration, the names of your three proposed BART stations, and your name

and a date (see Section 15 for specifics).

This lab will refer to various toolbars, buttons and menus which were explained in detail

with pictures in Lab 1. If needed, have a copy of Lab 1 handy and use it for reference.

Last name: Your assigned BART stations:

Existing Proposed

A-G Pittsburg-Bay Point Antioch, Brentwood, Byron

H-P Dublin-Pleasanton Isabel, Greenville, Tracy

Q-Z Fremont Irvington, Warm Springs, South Calaveras
